well diplomatic efforts to reach a
ceasefire deal between Israel and Hamas
are ramping up Hamas delegations in
Cairo to meet with mediators from Egypt
and Qatar the CIA director William Burns
is also there the Israelis are yet to
send their delegation and it's not clear
when that will happen sticking points
remain as Hamas demands Israel end the
war in Gaza permanently and that's
something prime minister Benyamin
netanyahu's government is refusing to do
in Ramy kurri he's a distinguished
public policy fellow at the American
University of Beirut he joined has live
from Boston Ramy always good to have you
with us so look I mean there's still
some cautious optimism that a ceasefire
deal can be reached in Cairo but we've
been down this road before haven't we so
how far apart are both sides do you
think well they're still uh far apart
but but less far apart than they were a
week or two ago there clearly there's
movement you know one signal that you
can always assume means something is
going on and know when Bill Burns the
CIA director joins the talks it means
that there's something serious is
happening the U the the reports you just
had from your correspondents um clearly
indicate that everybody is under
pressure the Israelis the um Hamas the
Americans are under intense pressure
here the American government with all
these student uprisings so people really
everybody wants a deal but nobody wants
to make a deal where he has to make more
concessions than the other person and
and that's an interesting point you make
Ramy let's just talk about Hamas is
position because earlier a spokesman for
Hamas said you know the group needs a
guarantee from the US that Israeli
forces won't launch an offensive on Rafa
and that Hamas won't agree to a truce
that doesn't end the war but let me ask
you Ramy I mean will Hamas need to
therefore as you say concede on what it
sees as its red line to move this deal
forward everybody will concede a little
bit if they get what they really want
everybody in every negotiation has ever
happened in the world
uh if somebody doesn't totally defeat
the other side and they start
negotiating they're going to make uh
some mutual concessions the U the
problem that Hamas has is that it it's
not clear what public opinion like in uh
is like in Gaza now after all the
tremendous suffering that the people
have H have experienced and this is we
can't tell because public opinion
polling is is not so easy to do and a
lot of people are scared to speak openly
okay um in a so so so let's just talk
about the Israelis and I mean they
haven't even sent a delegation to Cairo
yet and and they've insisted that Deal
or No Deal the raffer offensive will go
ahead but with domestic and US pressure
mounting on Netanyahu how much wiggle
room does he actually have
briefly he has a little he always has a
little bit of wiggle room and he tries
to expand that by sending different
messages to different audiences one of
the problems in a situation like this is
that whatever whatever anybody says it
could be factual it could be wishful
thinking it could be for domestic
political advantage and it could be to
hold off Foreign pressures so uh
probably about 30 40% of what people say
like officials Israeli or American or
Hamas is probably totally accurate Hamas
doesn't say much in public because
they're um very concerned about giving
away information but so yeah he he does
he he's in is in great stress nyaho and
and it's increasing Grammy just a final
thought to you on the US position I mean
the Biden Administration as you said is
facing mounting political pressure
particularly at home plus it's an
election year in the US so what real
leverage does Biden have over Israel to
move this deal
forward on paper Biden has total
leverage if he wants to uh exercise and
we've seen this in the past I mean you
know going way back in the past when
Bean was attacking Lebanon and and and
the president of the US got him out and
when uh the the the S operation 1956
Eisenhower called the Israelis and they
got out so yeah they have total leverage
because Israel can't do anything
militarily without the United States uh
and without the protection of the US
diplomatic but the US the president is
hesitant to use that power what we've
seen from the US is a lot of verbal uh
pressuring and and threatening and
cooling without carrying through for
instance blinkin made 75 trips whatever
Seven Trips I think to uh increase
humanitarian Aid to Gaza saying the
Israelis have promised to do it and it's
increased maybe 10% or 15% it's it's
nominal all right Ramy Curry always good
to get your thoughts and Analysis Ramy
thank you very much indeed for talking
to
us make sure to subscribe to our channel
to get the latest news from aler